hey guys uh it's difficult I do not want
to start any more videos than hey guys
that's how unnatural vegan starts her
videos [ __ ] that I've got a band to sing
oh yeah
Oh God so what are we supposed to say
what what is up isn't that what's
peerage okay
best best wishes to you and yours as you
join me for this YouTube video all right
we'll come up with sighing get the get
the marketing committee to work on a new
green or what church is open with
abolish yell No
[Music]
I'm Emma's yen alright okay
I remember what's hurt an interview with
a guy was part of 50 cent screw the
rapper 50 cent when they came up with
his background Diddy Jude ug you hit
that they actually had a brainstorming
session where they sat around try to
cope with that alright enough of the
aggression from an aggression guys this
video is both something that means an
awful lot to I think a small number of
people but it's very difficult for me to
say how many or how few people this
matters to over the internet over the
last five years I have several times
spoken to people who deeply passionately
believe that there is no such thing as
free will that there was no such thing
as human beings making arbitrary choices
or creative choices that all choices
human beings make are determined so
these are hard determinists and from my
perspective for them it really is a
religion now why do I consider this a
religious view well for one thing it is
very directly parallel to religious
determinism so a simple Christian form
of determinism would be the view of the
world that although you may imagine you
make decisions although you may imagine
you make choices although you may
sometimes regret looking back at your
life that you made the wrong choice
secretly and unknown to you as the myth
goes all of those decisions were part of
a mysterious plan the Christian God's
plan in fact those decisions were in a
sense not of your free choice not of
your election not of your of your free
will now scientific or scientistic
determinism sees the world in this same
way but it has replaced the role of the
Christian God with a variety of demons
and fairies some of them put emphasis on
genetics on DNA
some of them put emphasis on psychology
brain States and brain scans and brain
activity some put emphasis on a very
metaphysical reading of a chain of
causes and events that extend around the
whole world around us like the butterfly
flapping its way
wins the idea that some trivial cause
can indirectly have a cascading set of
knock-on effects some of which we may be
aware of and some of them not but
nevertheless each of us is ultimately
like a tornado that perceives itself as
making decisions but really does not
exist as an entity that makes decisions
at all but is merely the product of
unthinking a circumstance swirling
around it and at some point we come to
see that swirling within ourselves as if
it were our very selves
now the religious form of pious
god-fearing determinism is also
psychologically similar to scientistic
determinism in that it allows them to
have a very pious view of sinners if you
really believe this is a Christian then
you feel nothing but pity for the rapist
or murderer because you see them
ultimately as a kind of victim of
circumstances or even as a victim of a
divine joke of God's plan that in some
very real sense they didn't have a
choice or it was not their choice or it
was not their fault although of course
in another sense there is nobody else to
blame now in this same way I've just now
been engaged in a debate with people who
very piously and passionately believe in
this view of determinism and they really
do argue they have really passionately
said to me that they do not regard
rapists as being guilty of rape and they
do not regard murderers as being guilty
of murder not in the same way I do
because they absolutely insist that each
and every one of those criminals was
behaving under duress in effect they
were making those decisions as if they
were compelled to by outside forces that
determine everything so again these
outside forces whether there are genetic
evolutionary socio-economic myriad
whether they are tiny and trivial like a
butterfly flapping its wings or
something abstract and transcendental
and inevitable they add up to a
worldview that is magical and tantamount
to monotheism its equivalent in its
outcomes
the faith it demands of the believer now
what I pointed out to these people
repeatedly in the debate was that um how
great somehow that tiny bump destroyed
hmm I pointed out to them that what it
is they believe in here has no empirical
basis whatsoever and would not pass Karl
poppers test for falsifiability so I'm
not gonna degress into a long lecture
here about Karl Popper in the philosophy
of science and what falsifiability means
but the idea is to challenge a view
about that like this by saying okay what
elements of your view can be observed
empirically in real life and of course
with many with many theories of this
including psychological theories even
it's purely psychological not
metaphysical in any way if it's just a
claim made about people's mental states
intentions and emotions and decisions
ultimately um I'm gonna ask you I'm
gonna challenge you to explain to me
something you could empirically observe
something hypothetically you could
observe where if it were true if it
happened you would then accept that your
explanation of reality is wrong so the
textbook example Karl Popper gives of
this is the belief that light always
travels in a straight line and there was
a counter theory proposed I believe by
Albert Einstein himself that actually at
a certain stage of the Moon obscuring
the light of the Sun you should be able
to measure that the moon does actually
the gravity the gravity force of the
moon actually does intercept and
slightly bend off course the rays of
light that pass right next to the moon
very close to the moon and this was
tested in low behold it proved to be
true so the point is the theory was
originally one theory was light always
travels in a straight line and the other
theory was if there is a sufficiently
heavy object not just you know some
object that's sitting on this table here
next to me but something with enough
gravity force would actually result in
light bending in its course and it turns
out that was right but we have to be
willing to state our theories you know
where we will we can admit of an
empirical challenge on the discussion I
just had ultimately what they retreated
to was a position that their explanation
in the world has no empirical basis that
it has no pragmatic value because I said
to them also well if your theory is true
what problems does it solve whether a
theory is philosophical or mathematical
or one of physics even in the social
sciences a theory has to have a
problem-solving value it has to
elucidate something rather than merely
obfuscate something what is the problem
this this solves um great so I lose my
train of thought the way it's not you it
was the cooker going off for whatever
reason oh I'm a little bit run down a
little bit sick but it had a great
workout of the gym though okay it has to
have problem solving value it has to
elucidate something and it has to be
falsifiable right and in their case they
were treated to a position of saying no
their view of the world was purely a
sort of qualitative description of how
cognition works that there's nothing
empirical about it there's nothing
falsifiable about it there's nothing
that can be tested there's nothing that
could that could either prove or
disprove it so I said to the multiple
look from my perspective your view of
the world is magical when you walk
through the forest you see fairies
everywhere everywhere that there's
darkness and shadow you can imagine that
these magical forces you will you
believe in are active in the same way a
monotheists who believes in theological
determinism walks around the world and
everywhere sees God's plan if someone
who believes in God's plan wishes it
would rain and then instead of raining
there's a terrible flood or there's a
tsunami they'll believe it's God's plan
either way if there's a drought they say
the drought was God's plan if all their
crops are destroyed because there's no
rain at all they say that was God's plan
instead there's too much rain well it
turns out that was goes when they will
rationalize and reinterpret whatever
happens to affirm their deterministic
worldview and
these scientistic non monotheistic
believers in determinism they're just as
religious they are believers still but
they believe in a plurality of fairies
some of them putting more emphasis on
DNA some of them more on on other
factors and as they walk through the
world they see those spooks everywhere
they see those fairies and demons they
feel their own hypothesis being affirmed
again and again now how did the
conversation there was a debate several
people participated I was the only
person on my side of the debate um how
did this conclude so very interestingly
my final opponent because I talked to
several people who exhausted themselves
um the last fellow at bat the last fella
on the microphone he used an example
that you might think I had cornered him
into but he volunteered it he spoke at
some length about how he regards a
rapist as ultimately not responsible for
their commission of rape because from
his perspective criminal like that never
had an alternative they never had an
alternate course of action that you can
reproach them for failing to take as
okay so that's your perspective that's
your magical religious view of what
happened my view is instead compatible
with basically the legal tradition and
political tradition of every culture
I've heard of on planet earth for the
last 2,500 years three 3,000 years I
simply do think that yes people who
commit crimes choose to commit crimes
and so on okay so give me an example
what's problematic from my perspective
is that you can't really elucidate
what's happening when a human being sits
down at a blank canvas and tries to
paint a painting this is very different
from a criminal act there are a series
of creative and arbitrary decisions
being made but the painter here and when
he's done the painting
maybe his teacher tells him you know
what this is a really lousy painting and
maybe the teacher discusses with him in
what ways it's a lousy painting and why
it's lousy painting which techniques he
had neglected to practice or which
decisions he made which creative choices
he made
oh you chose to paint the sky
blue and it would be better if the sky
were red because you need this cut these
are the types of decisions you makin in
painting slang and in talking through
those decisions and talking through what
skills he has and what skills he lacks
and so on the painter may be filled with
a sense of regret and remorse and indeed
he regrets painting a bad painting
because he feels he feels that he could
have painted a better painting and what
do you know the next time he sits down
at a blank canvas
he makes different choices and he tries
to make a better painting again from my
perspective there's no mystery to be
explained here there's no metaphysical
problem or a priori conflict to be
resolved there's nothing difficult for
philosophy exchange but from their
perspective the painter is wrong to
regret having painted a bad painting
because he had no choice there was
absolutely no alternative all along the
only painting he could have possibly
painted was this terrible painting and
that may be a very pious and very
reassuring and very kind and very nice
thing to say
and from my perspective it's complete
nonsense I can't imagine what motivates
it it is absolutely no pragmatic value
as a philosophy or as a political
philosophy it's not gonna help you solve
any problems or improve society so
fundamentally I do not know why they
bother um the only other thing I
mentioned this video wrapping it up is
there was a real contrast in the
selection of examples that the two sides
used my examples are very directly and
simply drawn from reality
like painting a painting who makes the
creative decisions where's that come
from how does that proceed why would
this deterministic worldview help you
with this I mean do you really believe
it is God's plan or the plan of some
plurality of demons and fairies that
this painting has to turn out one way
and one way only as opposed to being
something each of us has control over
arbitrary control creative control ex
nihilo control
but ultimately a kind of meaningless
control also control that I mean it
doesn't reflect your genetics or you
know any other great transcendental
paranormal abstraction you know you're
just gonna sit down and try to come up
with an idea and do the best you can
so my examples were we're very close to
real life experience we can all relate
to and they're examples relied on huge
leaps of inference that I found
laughable one fellow was insisting again
and again that a human being is no
different from a computer playing chess
it was striking to me that he insisted
again and again that computer playing
chess that's the product ultimately of
human beings programming instructions
etc is literally he used the word
literally again and again the same as a
human mind thinking now I do have a
little bit of experience with computer
programming I studied it in school when
I was a child basically and I tried to
talk him through to what extent these
two things are really profoundly
dissimilar and they're dissimilar in
ways that matter for the argument that
he's making a human mind is very very
different from a computer code running
off of a hard drive it's very different
even from the particular type of
programming he's describing or you have
a quote-unquote evolutionary process
producing the chess-playing computer but
the word evolution is being used here in
a sense that has nothing to do with
natural selection with wild animals
competing for who gets to mate that the
nature of the human brain is really not
comparable to a set of instructions
written in a computer programming
language like C++ or assembly code or
what have you that in fact the the
allegory he's using in many ways dams
his own philosophical case it requires
really a religious level of faith and
very creative leaps of inference to
possibly believe that a computer playing
chess following a code is anyway similar
to the decisions we make when we sit
down at a blank canvas decide what it is
we're gonna draw and then how it is that
we're gonna draw it so there you go guys
this is a philosophy that seems to be
popular amongst vegan intellectuals who
spend a lot of time on the Internet in
2018 I don't know if this will become a
really kind of trivial footnote in
modern Western history or if this is
going to go on to be the next big thing
like blue jeans I could see it going
either way because you know I do think
that these people have an understandable
motive I think that they want to have a
view of the world that is fundamentally
compassionate and that looks at people
who are raised in poverty mired in bad
circumstances and making bad decisions
as not being culpable for those
decisions and I'm sure that their heart
is in the right place and I'm sure that
just as religious people who believe in
God's plan draw a sense of faith and
moral courage and positive motivation
from seeing the world that way I think
they probably do get a kind of warm and
fuzzy compassionate glow in believing if
not quite like Spinoza's concept if not
quite believing that they live in the
best of all possible worlds that they
live in a world where no matter how
terrible it was the only possible world
and that any given person is 100% a
product of their circumstances and their
genetics and these mysterious forces
that surround them that are beyond their
control
that in fact nothing is under your
control that nothing is ultimately your
fault what a liberating delusion that
must be a virus yen